
--- PAGE 1 ---
A Watermark for Large Language Models
John Kirchenbauer * Jonas Geiping * Yuxin Wen Jonathan Katz Ian Miers Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
Abstract
Potential harms of large language models can be mitigated
by watermarking model output, i.e., embedding signals into
generated text that are invisible to humans but algorithmi-
cally detectable from a short span of tokens. We propose a
watermarking framework for proprietary language models.
The watermark can be embedded with negligible impact
on text quality, and can be detected using an efficient open-
source algorithm without access to the language model API
or parameters. The watermark works by selecting a random-
ized set of “green” tokens before a word is generated, and
then softly promoting use of green tokens during sampling.
We propose a statistical test for detecting the watermark
with interpretable p-values, and derive an information-
theoretic framework for analyzing the sensitivity of the
watermark. We test the watermark using a multi-billion
parameter model from the Open Pretrained Transformer
(OPT) family, and discuss robustness and security.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as the recently de-
veloped ChatGPT, can write documents, create executable
code, and answer questions, often with human-like capa-
bilities (Schulman et al., 2022). As these systems become
more pervasive, there is increasing risk that they may be
used for malicious purposes (Bergman et al., 2022; Mirsky
et al., 2023). These include social engineering and election
manipulation campaigns that exploit automated bots on so-
cial media platforms, creation of fake news and web content,
and use of AI systems for cheating on academic writing and
coding assignments. Furthermore, the proliferation of syn-
thetic data on the web complicates future dataset creation
efforts, as synthetic data is often inferior to human content
and must be detected and excluded before model training
(Radford et al., 2022). For many reasons, the ability to de-
tect and audit the usage of machine-generated text becomes
a key principle of harm reduction for large language mod-
els (Bender et al., 2021; Crothers et al., 2022; Grinbaum &
Adomaitis, 2022).
*Equal contribution . Code and demo are available at
github.com/jwkirchenbauer/lm-watermarking.
Correspondence to: John Kirchenbauer <jkirchen@umd.edu>.
…The watermark detection algorithm 
can be made public, enabling third 
parties (e.g., social media 
platforms) to run it themselves, or 
it can be kept private and run behind 
an API.  We seek a watermark with the 
following properties:
Prompt
No watermark
With watermark
- minimal marginal probability for a 
detection attempt.
- Good speech frequency and energy 
rate reduction.
- messages indiscernible to humans.
- easy for humans to verify.
Extremely efficient on average term 
lengths and word frequencies on 
synthetic, microamount text (as little 
as 25 words)
Very small and low-resource key/hash 
(e.g., 140 bits per key is sufficient 
for 99.999999999% of the Synthetic 
Internet
p-value 
Z-score
Num tokens
56
36
.31
7.4
.38
6e-14
Figure 1. Outputs of a language model, both with and without
the application of a watermark. The watermarked text, if written
by a human, is expected to contain 9 “green” tokens, yet it con-
tains 28. The probability of this happening by random chance is
≈6×10−14, leaving us extremely certain that this text is machine
generated. Words are marked with their respective colors. The
model is OPT-6.7B using multinomial sampling. Watermark
parameters are γ, δ = (0.25, 2). The prompt is the whole para-
graph marked in blue below.
In this work, we study watermarking of language
model output. A watermark is a hidden pattern in
text that is imperceptible to humans, while making
the text algorithmically identifiable as synthetic. We
propose an efficient watermark that makes synthetic
text detectable from short spans of tokens (as few as
25 tokens), while false-positives (where human text
is marked as machine-generated) are statistically im-
probable. The watermark detection algorithm can be
made public, enabling third parties (e.g., social media
platforms) to run it themselves, or it can be kept private
and run behind an API. We seek a watermark with the
following properties:
arXiv:2301.10226v4  [cs.LG]  1 May 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
A Watermark for Large Language Models. Page 2 of 13.
• The watermark can be algorithmically detected with-
out any knowledge of the model parameters or access
to the language model API. This property allows the
detection algorithm to be open sourced even when the
model is not. This also makes detection cheap and fast
because the LLM does not need to be loaded or run.
• Watermarked text can be generated using a standard
language model without re-training.
• The watermark is detectable from only a contiguous
portion of the generated text. This way, the watermark
remains detectable when only a slice of the generation
is used to create a larger document.
• The watermark cannot be removed without modifying
a significant fraction of the generated tokens.
• We can compute a rigorous statistical measure of con-
fidence that the watermark has been detected.
1.1. Notation & Language model basics
Language models have a “vocabulary” V containing words
or word fragments known as “tokens.”
Typical vocab-
ularies contain |V| = 50, 000 tokens or more (Radford
et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019). Consider a sequence of
T tokens {s(t)} ∈VT .
Entries with negative indices,
s(−Np), · · · , s(−1), represent a “prompt” of length Np and
s(0), · · · , s(T ) are tokens generated by an AI system in re-
sponse to the prompt.
A language model (LM) for next word prediction is a func-
tion f, often parameterized by a neural network, that accepts
as input a sequence of known tokens s(−Np), · · · , s(t−1),
which contains a prompt and the first t −1 tokens already
produced by the language model, and then outputs a vector
of |V | logits, one fo
