
--- PAGE 1 ---
RADAR: Robust AI-Text Detection via
Adversarial Learning
Xiaomeng Hu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
xmhu23@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research
New York, USA
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com
Tsung-Yi Ho
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Sha Tin, Hong Kong
tyho@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) and the intensifying popular-
ity of ChatGPT-like applications have blurred the boundary of high-quality text
generation between humans and machines. However, in addition to the anticipated
revolutionary changes to our technology and society, the difficulty of distinguishing
LLM-generated texts (AI-text) from human-generated texts poses new challenges
of misuse and fairness, such as fake content generation, plagiarism, and false
accusations of innocent writers. While existing works show that current AI-text
detectors are not robust to LLM-based paraphrasing, this paper aims to bridge
this gap by proposing a new framework called RADAR, which jointly trains a
robust AI-text detector via adversarial learning. RADAR is based on adversarial
training of a paraphraser and a detector. The paraphraser’s goal is to generate
realistic content to evade AI-text detection. RADAR uses the feedback from the
detector to update the paraphraser, and vice versa. Evaluated with 8 different
LLMs (Pythia, Dolly 2.0, Palmyra, Camel, GPT-J, Dolly 1.0, LLaMA, and Vicuna)
across 4 datasets, experimental results show that RADAR significantly outperforms
existing AI-text detection methods, especially when paraphrasing is in place. We
also identify the strong transferability of RADAR from instruction-tuned LLMs to
other LLMs, and evaluate the improved capability of RADAR via GPT-3.5-Turbo.
Project Page and Demos: https://radar.vizhub.ai
IBM demo is developed by Hendrik Strobelt and Benjamin Hoover at IBM Research
HuggingFace demo is developed by Xiaomeng Hu
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are high-capacity neural networks that are pretrained at web-scale
datasets. They are foundation models achieving state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of natural
language processing tasks (e.g. document completion, question answering, machine translation, and
content creation with text prompts) with advanced capabilities such as in-context learning and
reasoning (e.g. chain of thoughts). In particular, LLMs are the backbone of many ChatGPT-like
conversational bots that enable text generation with high fluency and accuracy. However, while LLMs
and their derived applications are expected to become ubiquitous in our future technology and society,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
arXiv:2307.03838v2  [cs.CL]  24 Oct 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Figure 1: Overview of RADAR. An AI-text corpus is first generated from a target (frozen) language
model from a human-text corpus. In RADAR, we introduce a paraphraser (a tunable language
model) and a detector (a separate tunable language model). In the training stage, the detector aims to
discern human-text v.s. AI-text, while the paraphraser aims to rewrite AI-text to evade detection. The
model parameters of the paraphraser and the detector are updated in an adversarial learning manner
as described in Section 3. In the evaluation stage, the trained detector is deployed to predict the
likelihood of AI-generated content for any input instance.
new risks in failing to distinguish the so-called “AI text” generated by LLMs have emerged and
gained considerable attention due to various reasons. The problem of reliable AI-text detection is
motivated by realistic socio-technological challenges such as fake content generation, AI plagiarism
(e.g. using LLMs for writing tests), and false accusations of innocent writers. According to a report
released by OpenAI1, their latest AI-text detector is admittedly not fully reliable. In the reported
evaluation of some challenging cases for English texts, their classifier only correctly identifies 26%
of AI-text (true positives) while incorrectly classifying 9% of human-written text (false positives).
Moreover, a recent study [21] found that state-of-the-art AI-text detectors demonstrated severely
degraded performance when encountering texts written by non-native English speakers.
What can be even more challenging in AI-text detection is that existing AI-text detectors are prone
to be manipulated. The authors in [27, 17] showed that using LLMs as a paraphraser can easily
evade several AI-text detection methods, even in the scenario when the original AI-text had been
watermarked. These findings sparked a heated debate about whether and how we can successfully
design a reliable AI-text detector. While [27] theoretically quantifies the best detector’s performance
with respect to the total variation distance between AI-text and human-text distributions and argues
that AI-text is difficult to detect, another work [3] proves that it is possible to obtain a reliable AI-text
detector unless the human-text distribution is exactly the same as the AI-text distribution, based
on an information-theoretical analysis (i.e., the sample complexity of Chernoff information and
likelihood-ratio-based detectors).
To improve AI-text detection, we propose RADAR, a framework for training a robust AI-text detector
using adversarial learning. An overview of RADAR is illustrated in Figure 1. Our proposal draws
inspiration from adversarial machine learning techniques that train a high-quality generator by
introducing a discriminator to form a two-player game, such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [10]. In RADAR, we introduce a paraphraser and a detector as two players with opposite
objectives. The paraphraser’s goal is to generate realistic content that can evade AI-text detection,
while the detector’s goal is to enhance AI-text detectability. In our framework, both the paraphraser
and the detector are parametrized by separate LLMs. During training, the paraphraser learns to
