
--- PAGE 1 ---
GLTR: Statistical Detection and Visualization of Generated Text
Sebastian Gehrmann
Harvard SEAS
gehrmann@seas.harvard.edu
Hendrik Strobelt
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI lab
hendrik.strobelt@ibm.com
Alexander M. Rush
Harvard SEAS
srush@seas.harvard.edu
Abstract
The rapid improvement of language models
has raised the specter of abuse of text gen-
eration systems. This progress motivates the
development of simple methods for detecting
generated text that can be used by and ex-
plained to non-experts. We develop GLTR, a
tool to support humans in detecting whether a
text was generated by a model. GLTR applies
a suite of baseline statistical methods that can
detect generation artifacts across common
sampling schemes. In a human-subjects study,
we show that the annotation scheme provided
by GLTR improves the human detection-rate
of fake text from 54% to 72% without any
prior training.
GLTR is open-source and
publicly deployed,
and has already been
widely used to detect generated outputs.
1
Introduction
The success of pretrained language models for nat-
ural language understanding (McCann et al., 2017;
Devlin et al., 2018; Peters et al., 2018) has led to a
race to train unprecedentedly large language mod-
els (Radford et al., 2019). These large language
models have the potential to generate textual out-
put that is indistinguishable from human-written
text to a non-expert reader. That means that the ad-
vances in the development of large language mod-
els also lower the barrier for abuse.
Instances of malicious autonomously generated
text at scale are rare but often high-proﬁle, for in-
stance when a simple generation system was used
to create fake comments in opposition to net neu-
trality (Grimaldi, 2018). Other scenarios include
the possibility of generating false articles (Wang,
2017) or misleading reviews (Fornaciari and Poe-
sio, 2014). Forensic techniques will be necessary
to detect this automatically generated text. These
techniques should be accurate, but also easy to
convey to non-experts and require little setup cost.
Figure 1: The top-k overlay within GLTR. It is easy
to distinguish sampled from written text. The real text
is from the Wikipedia page of The Great British Bake
Off, the fake from GPT-2 large with temperature 0.7.
In this work, we argue that simple statistical de-
tection methods for generated/fake text can be ap-
plied within a visual tool to assist in detection. The
underlying assumption is that systems over gener-
ate from a limited subset of the true distribution of
natural language, for which they have high conﬁ-
dence. In a white-box setting where we have ac-
cess to the system distribution, this property can be
detected by computing the model density of gener-
ated output and comparing it to human-generated
text. We further hypothesize that these methods
generalize to black-box scenarios, as long as the
fake text follows a similar sampling assumption
and is generated by a large language model.
We develop a visual tool, GLTR, that highlights
text passages based on these metrics, as shown
in Figure 11. We conduct experiments to empir-
ically test these metrics on a set of widely-used
language models and show that real text uses a
wider subset of the distribution under a model.
This is noticeable especially when the model
distribution is low-entropy and concentrates most
1Our tool is available at http://gltr.io.
The
code
is
provided
at
https://github.com/
HendrikStrobelt/detecting-fake-text
arXiv:1906.04043v1  [cs.CL]  10 Jun 2019

--- PAGE 2 ---
(a) statistics
(b) conﬁg
(c) tokens
(d) details about ‘chuck’
Figure 2: User interface for GLTR. On the top, we show three graphs with global information (a). Below the
graphs, users can switch between two different annotations and customize the top-k thresholds (b). On the bottom,
each token is shown with the associated annotation as heatmap (c). The tooltip (d) highlights information about
the current prediction when hovering over the word “chuck”.
probability in a few words. We demonstrate in
a human-subjects study that without the tool,
subjects can differentiate between human- and
model-generated text only 54% of the time. With
our tool, subjects were able to detect fake text
with an accuracy of over 72% without any prior
training. By presenting this information visually,
we also hope the tool teaches users to notice the
artefacts of text generation systems.
2
Method
Consider the generation detection task as decid-
ing whether a sequence of words ˆX1:N have been
written by a human or generated from a model. We
do not have supervision for this task, and instead,
want to use distributional properties of the under-
lying language. In the white-box case, we are also
given full access to the language model distribu-
tion, p(Xi |X1:i−1), that was used in generation.
In the general case, we assume access to a different
learned model of the same form. This approach
can be contextualized in the evaluation framework
proposed by Hashimoto et al. (2019) who ﬁnd that
human-written and generated text can be discrim-
inated based on the model likelihood if the human
acceptability is high.
The underlying assumption of our methods
is that to generate natural looking text, most
systems sample from the head of the distribu-
tion, e.g., through max sampling (Gu et al.,
2017), k-max sampling (Fan et al., 2018), beam
search (Chorowski and Jaitly, 2016; Shao et al.,
2017), temperature-modulated sampling (Dagan
and Engelson, 1995), or even implicitly with
rule-based templated approaches.
These tech-
niques are biased, but seem to be necessary for
ﬂuent output and are widely used.
We there-
fore propose three simple tests, using a detec-
tion model, to assess whether text is generated in
this way: (Test 1) the probability of the word,
e.g. pdet(Xi = ˆXi|X1:i−1), (Test 2) the absolute
rank of a word, e.g. rank in pdet(Xi|X1:i−1), and
(Test 3) the entropy of the predicted distribution,
e.g. −P
w pdet(Xi = w|X1:i−1) log pdet(Xi =

